### 🚨 Important Note: 
All Docker commands runs with sudo priviledges

1. **docker pull**: Pull an image from a registry to your local machine. (Default registry is docker Hub)
   ```
   docker pull [OPTIONS] IMAGENAME[:TAG|@DIGEST]
   ```
   - IMAGENAME: The name of the image you want to pull `docker pull ubuntu`
   - TAG: The specific version of the image (optional). If not specified, Docker will pull the latest tag by default `docker pull ubuntu:20.04`
   - @DIGEST: A specific digest of the image (optional) `docker pull ubuntu@sha256:<digest>`

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `--all-tags or -a`: Pull all images with different tags from given registry `docker pull --all-tags ubuntu`
   - `--disable-content-trust or --disable-content-trust=true`: Skip image verification (content trust is enabled by default) `docker pull --disable-content-trust ubuntu`
   - `--platform or -p`: Set the platform if the image supports multiple architectures (e.g., linux/amd64, linux/arm64) `docker pull --platform linux/arm64 ubuntu`
   - `--quiet or -q`: Suppress verbose output. Only show the image ID after pulling `docker pull --quiet ubuntu`
    <br>
    <br>
    
    **To pull a Docker image from a registry other than Docker Hub**
      ```bash
      docker pull [REGISTRY_URL]/[NAMESPACE]/[IMAGE_NAME]:[TAG]
      ```
      - REGISTRY_URL: The URL of the Docker registry you want to pull the image from.
      - NAMESPACE: The project or user namespace on the registry (optional depending on the registry).
      - IMAGE_NAME: The name of the Docker image.
      - TAG: The specific version of the image (optional, defaults to latest if not specified).
  
      Examples:
   
       1. Pulling from a Private Registry:
         `docker pull myregistrydomain.com/myproject/myimage:mytag`
   
       2. Pulling from Amazon ECR (Elastic Container Registry):
         `docker pull aws_account_id.dkr.ecr.region.amazonaws.com/myrepo/myimage:mytag`

          Before pulling from Amazon ECR, you'll typically need to authenticate first:
         `aws ecr get-login-password --region region | docker login --username AWS --password-stdin aws_account_id.dkr.ecr.region.amazonaws.com`

       3. Pulling from Google Container Registry (GCR):
         `docker pull gcr.io/myproject/myimage:mytag`

          Google requires authentication via gcloud before pulling:
         `gcloud auth configure-docker`

       4. Pulling from GitHub Container Registry:
         `docker pull ghcr.io/owner/repo/image:tag`

          Authentication may be required:
         `echo $CR_PAT | docker login ghcr.io -u USERNAME --password-stdin`

   If the registry requires authentication, you'll need to log in before pulling an image. Use the docker login command to do so:
  `docker login [REGISTRY_URL]` After logging in, you can pull images as described above.

<hr>

2. **docker images**:  List all the Docker images that are stored locally on your machine.
   ```
   docker images [OPTIONS] [REPOSITORY[:TAG]]
   ```
   *REPOSITORY:TAG*

   You can specify a repository and/or tag to narrow down the list `docker images ubuntu:latest`. This command only shows ubuntu image with latest tag
   
   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-a, --all`: Show all images (default hides intermediate images) `docker images -a`
   - `-q, --quiet`: Show only numeric IDs `docker images -q`
   - `--filter, -f`: Filter output based on conditions provided.For example: List images with a specific label `docker images --filter "label=com.example.version=1.0"`
   - `--format`: Pretty-print images using a Go template. For example: Display only the repository and tag `docker images --format "{{.Repository}}:{{.Tag}}"`
   - `--no-trunc`: Docker truncates image IDs and command output to fit neatly in the terminal display. The --no-trunc flag tells Docker to display the full length of these strings instead of truncating them. `docker images --no-trunc`
   
<hr>

3. **docker run**: create and start a container from a Docker image
   ```
   docker run [OPTIONS] IMAGENAME [COMMAND] [ARG...]
   ```
   - IMAGENAME: name of Docker image from which to create the container. If image is not present locally then docker will pull it from the registry
   - COMMAND: The command to run inside the container (optional) `docker run ubuntu ls`
   - ARG...: Arguments to pass to the command (optional) `docker run ubuntu ls -ltr`
  
     Example:`docker run ubuntu echo "Hello, World!"`
     This command runs an ubuntu container and executes the echo "Hello, World!" command inside it. **Once the command completes, the container stops**

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-d, --detach`: Run the container in the detached mode. By default all containers runs in attach mode. 
     - detached mode: container runs in the background, and you are not attached to the container's output or input `docker run -d ubuntu sleep 1000` This command creates and starts the container in the background and keeps it running for 1000 seconds.
     - attached mode: container's STDOUT, STDERR, and optionally STDIN, are attached to your terminal session. This means you can see output directly in your terminal and interact with the container `docker run ubuntu sleep 1000` This command creates and starts the container and keeps it running for 1000 seconds, but you will be attached to the container until the container is running.
     - Detaching an attached container : If you started a container in attached mode and want to detach from it without stopping the container, you can use the following key sequence: Ctrl + P followed by Ctrl + Q This detaches the terminal from the container while leaving the container running. This will only work if container is runnning with -it option
     - Reattaching to a Detached Container: Use the docker attach command to reattach to a running container's STDIN/STDOUT/STDERR.`docker attach <container_id_or_name>`
     - To exit from an stop the container while you are inside a container's interactive shell: `exit`
   - `-i, --interactive`: Keeps STDIN open even if not attached `docker run -i ubuntu`
   - `-t, --tty`: Allocate a terminal. Often used with -i for interactive shells
     - `docker run -it ubuntu /bin/bash` This command opens an interactive bash shell inside the ubuntu container
     - `docker run -it python:3.9` This command runs the Python interactive shell inside the container to type python commands.
   - `--name`: Assign a name to the container `docker run --name mycontainer ubuntu`
   - `-p, --publish`: Map a host port to a container port. Format: host_port:container_port `docker run -p 8080:80 nginx` This maps port 8080 on the host to port 80 in the nginx container.
   - `-v, --volume`: Mount a host directory or volume into the container `docker run -v /host/path:/container/path ubuntu` This mounts the host directory /host/path into the container's /container/path.
   - `--mount` : This does the same as the -v option but is more descriptive and flexible `docker run -d --mount source=my_volume,target=/app/data my_image`
   - `--rm`:Automatically remove the container once it stops.
   - `-e, --env`: Set environment variables inside the container `docker run -e MY_VAR=value ubuntu printenv MY_VAR`
   - `--network`: Connect the container to a specific network `docker run --network my_network ubuntu`
   - `-h, --hostname`: Set the hostname of the container `docker run -h myhostname ubuntu`

<hr>

4. **docker ps**: List running containers.
   ```
   docker ps [OPTIONS]
   ```
   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-a or --all`: Show all containers (running + stopped) containers `docker ps -a`
   - `-q or --quiet`: Display only the container IDs `docker ps -q`
   - `-l or --latest`: Show only the most recently created container, including stopped ones `docker ps -l`
   - `--no-trunc`: Don’t truncate output (e.g., show full container IDs, command, etc.) `docker ps --no-trunc`
   - `-f or --filter`: Filter the output based on conditions provided `docker ps -f "status=exited"`
   - `--format`: Pretty-print containers using a Go template `docker ps --format "{{.ID}}: {{.Names}}"`

<hr>

5. **docker exec**: Run a command in a already running container. 
   ```
   docker exec [OPTIONS] CONTAINER COMMAND [ARG...]
   ```
   - CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container where you want to run the command.
   - COMMAND: The command you want to run inside the container.
   -  ARG...: Any arguments you want to pass to the command.
    
   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-i or --interactive`: Keep STDIN open even if not attached `docker exec -i <container> <command>`
   - `-t or --tty`: Allocate a terminal. This is often used in combination with -i to allow for interactive command execution `docker exec -it <container> <command>`
   - `-d or --detach`: Run the command in the background `docker exec -d <container> <command>`
   - `-u or --user`: Run the command as a specific user inside the container `docker exec -u <username> <container> <command>`

   Usage:
      - `docker exec -it my_container /bin/bash` :  opens a bash shell inside the container named my_container
      - `docker exec my_container cat /var/log/nginx/access.log` : check the contents of log files
      - `docker exec -u www-data <container_id_or_name> <command>` : Run a Command as a Specific User
      - `docker exec -d my_container touch /tmp/background_task`: run a command in the background inside the container
      - `docker exec <container_id_or_name> env` : print all environment variables inside a running container
  
   Note:
   You can run multiple docker exec commands on the same container to perform different tasks.
<hr>

6. **docker stop**: Stop one or more running containers.

   When you stop a container, Docker sends a SIGTERM signal to the main process inside the container, allowing it to shut down gracefully. If the process does not stop within a certain time (10 seconds by default), Docker then sends a SIGKILL signal to forcefully terminate the container.
   ```
   docker stop [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]
   ```
   CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container(s) you want to stop. You can specify multiple containers by separating their names or IDs with a space.

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-t or --time`: Specify a timeout (in seconds) before Docker sends the SIGKILL signal to force stop the container. The default is 10 seconds. `docker stop -t 20 <container_id_or_name>`

7. **docker start**: Start one or more stopped containers.

   When you use this command, Docker resumes the container(s) from the state they were in before they were stopped.
   ```
   docker start [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]
   ```
   CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container(s) you want to start. You can specify multiple containers by separating their names or IDs with a space.

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-a or --attach`: Attach STDOUT/STDERR and forward signals to the container. This is useful if you want to see the output of the container directly in your terminal `docker start -a my_container`
   - `-i or --interactive`: Attach container’s STDIN and forward signals. Typically used with -a for interactive containers `docker start -ai my_container`
  
<hr>

7. **docker kill**: immediately stops one or more running Docker container
   
   `docker stop`, attempts to gracefully shut down the container by sending a SIGTERM signal first and then a SIGKILL signal if necessary, `docker kill` sends a specified signal (default is SIGKILL) right away, which forcefully terminates the process.
   
   ```
   docker kill [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]
   ```
   CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container(s) you want to kill. You can specify multiple containers by separating their names or IDs with a space.
   
   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-s or --signal`: Send a specific signal to the container’s main process instead of the default SIGKILL `docker kill -s SIGTERM <container_id_or_name>`

<hr>

8. **docker restart**: The docker restart command is used to restart one or more Docker containers.
- Restarting a container is useful for applying configuration changes, recovering from errors, or resetting the container's state.
```
docker restart [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]
```
CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container(s) you want to restart. You can specify multiple container names or IDs separated by spaces.

*OPTIONS*:
- `-t or --time`: Specifies the number of seconds to wait for the container to stop before forcibly killing it. The default is 10 seconds. `docker restart -t 30 my_container`

<hr>

9. **docker rm**: Remove one or more stopped containers.
   ```
   docker rm [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]
   ```
   
   CONTAINER: The name or ID of the container(s) you want to remove. You can specify multiple containers by separating their names or IDs with a space.

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-f or --force`: Forced removal of running container (first stopping container (sending a SIGKILL signal) and then remove it) `docker rm -f my_container`
   - `-v or --volumes`: Remove any anonymous volumes associated with the container. By default, Docker does not remove these volumes when you remove the container `docker rm -v my_container`
   - `-l or --link`: Remove the specified link associated with the container, but do not remove the container itself `docker rm -l my_container_link`(Its a legacy feature and is less relevant with modern Docker networking practices)
     
<hr>

10. **docker rmi**: Remove one or more images.
   ```
   docker rmi [OPTIONS] IMAGE [IMAGE...]
   ```
   
   IMAGE: The name, tag, or ID of the image(s) you want to remove. You can specify multiple images by separating their names, tags, or IDs with a space.

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-f or --force`: Force the removal of an image, even if it is currently being used by one or more containers. This is generally not recommended unless you know what you’re doing, as it could lead to orphaned containers that no longer have a corresponding image `docker rmi -f ubuntu:latest`
   - `--no-prune`: Do not delete untagged parent images. By default, Docker tries to clean up images "dangling" images). Using --no-prune prevents this cleanup `docker rmi --no-prune ubuntu:latest`
   
<hr>

11. **docker logs**: Fetch the logs of a (running/stopped) container. This is useful for debugging, monitoring, or understanding what's happening within a container.
```
docker logs <container_name_or_id>
```
*OPTIONS*:
- `-f, --follow`: Stream the logs in real-time `docker logs -f my_container`
- `--tail`: Show only a certain number of lines from the end of the logs `docker logs --tail 50 my_container`
- `-t, --timestamps`: Show timestamps with each log entry `docker logs -t my_container`
- `--since`: Show logs since a specific time, for example, 10m for the last 10 minutes or a timestamp `docker logs --since 10m my_container`
- `--until`: Show logs up until a specific time `docker logs --until 2023-08-31T15:00:00 my_container`
- `--details`: Show extra details provided to logs (if available) `docker logs --details my_container`

<hr>

12. **docker inspect**: Return low-level information on Docker objects such as containers, images, volumes, networks, and more. This information is presented in JSON format, giving you a comprehensive view of the configuration and status of the specified Docker object.
```
docker inspect <object_id>
```
- The output of the docker inspect contains all the configuration data related to the Docker object, such as environment variables, networking information, mount points, and more. To filter the output and extract specific details, you can use the --format flag with Go templates: `docker inspect --format '{{ .State.Running }}' my_container` This command will only display whether the container is running.

<hr>

13. **docker info**: Displays system-wide information about Docker.
```
docker info
```

<hr>

14. **docker build**: Build an image from a Dockerfile.
   ```
   docker build [OPTIONS] PATH | URL | -
   ```
   PATH: The path to the directory containing the Dockerfile. This directory is known as the build context.
   URL: A Git repository URL that contains a Dockerfile.
   -: Read the Dockerfile from stdin.

   *OPTIONS*:
   - `-t, --tag`: Name and optionally tag the image in the name:tag format `docker build -t my_image:latest .` This will build an image named my_image with the latest tag.
   - `-f, --file`: Name of the Dockerfile to use. By default, Docker looks for a file named Dockerfile in the context directory `docker build -f Dockerfile.dev -t my_image:dev .`
   - `--no-cache`: Do not use cache when building the image. This forces Docker to rebuild every layer. `docker build --no-cache -t my_image:latest .`
   - `--build-arg`: Set build-time variables that are passed as ARG in the Dockerfile `docker build --build-arg VERSION=1.0 -t my_image:latest .`
   - `--target`: Set the target stage to build in a multi-stage Dockerfile `docker build --target builder -t my_image:builder .`
   - `--platform`: Set the target platform for the image (e.g., linux/amd64, linux/arm64) `docker build --platform linux/amd64 -t my_image:amd64 .`

<hr>

15. **docker-compose**: docker compose is a tool used to define and manage multi-container Docker applications. With a docker-compose.yml file, you can define all the services your application needs, their configurations, and the relationships between them.
```
# Structure of docker-compose.yaml file

version: '3.8'

services:
  web:
    image: nginx:latest
    ports:
      - "8080:80"
    volumes:
      - ./html:/usr/share/nginx/html
    networks:
      - webnet

  database:
    image: mysql:5.7
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: example
    volumes:
      - db_data:/var/lib/mysql
    networks:
      - webnet

volumes:
  db_data:

networks:
  webnet:
```

*Basic Commands in docker compose*:
- `docker compose up`: This command starts up all the services defined in your docker-compose.yml file. You can use the -d flag to run them in the background (detached mode) `docker compose up -d`
- `docker compose down`: This command stops and removes all the containers, networks, and volumes created by docker compose up.
- `docker compose logs`: This command shows the logs of all services. You can use -f to follow the logs in real-time. You can use -f to follow the logs in real-time `docker compose logs -f`
- `docker compose restart`: restart all the services
- `docker compose build`: This command builds or rebuilds the services defined in the docker-compose.yml file. You can add the --no-cache option to rebuild without using the cache: `docker compose build --no-cache`
- `docker compose up --scale web=3`: This command will start 3 instances of the web service.

<hr>

16. **docker volume**: The docker volume command is used to manage Docker volumes, which are a type of persistent storage that containers can use to store and share data.

*Basic commands in docker compose*:
- `docker volume create my_volume`: This creates a new Docker volume named my_volume.
- `docker volume ls`: This lists all Docker volumes on your system
- `docker volume inspect volume_name`: This provides detailed information about the volume my_volume, including its mount point on the host system.
- `docker volume rm volume_name`: This removes the volume named my_volume. Note that a volume cannot be removed if it is currently in use by any containers.
- `docker volume prune`: Remove All Unused Volumes. Docker will ask for confirmation before proceeding.
  
17. **docker network**: The docker network command is used to manage Docker networks, which allow containers to communicate with each other. Docker networks are crucial for multi-container applications, enabling isolated environments and controlled communication between containers
*Basic commands in docker network*:
- `docker network ls`: This lists all networks available on your Docker host, including built-in ones like bridge, host, and none
- `docker network create network_name`: creates a new bridge network with the given name. You can also specify the network type:
     - `docker network create --driver bridge my_bridge_network`
     - `docker network create --driver overlay my_overlay_network`
     - `docker network create --driver host my_host_network`
     - `docker network create --driver none my_none_network`
     - `docker network create --driver macvlan --subnet=192.168.1.0/24 --gateway=192.168.1.1 my_macvlan_network`: Allows you to assign a MAC address to a container, making it appear as a physical device on your network. Useful for legacy applications that require direct access to the physical network.
- `docker network inspect network_name`: This provides detailed information about the given network, including the containers connected to it and their IP addresses.
- `docker network connect network_name container_name`: Connect a Container to a Network
- `docker network disconnect network_name container_name`: Disconnect a Container to a Network
- `docker network rm network_name`: Remove a Network. Note that the network cannot be removed if any containers are still connected to it.
- `docker network prune`: This removes all unused networks, helping to clean up the Docker environment

<hr>

These are just a few commonly used Docker commands. There are many more commands and options available, which you can explore further in the Docker documentation or by using the `docker --help` command.


